---
title: Sailing the Belizean Coastline
---
This past week I had the pleasure of sailing around Belize with my family. This was the third
sailing trip we've done together, but this one involved some of the toughest weather and volatile
waters.

We first arrived in Belize City, where we took a puddle-jumper to Placencia. There, my father and I
sat through a two-hour briefing about the boat and the cayes to ensure our safety during the trip.
By the time the briefing had finished, it was too late to embark, so we ate dinner in Placencia and
spent the night on the boat.

The next morning, we left for the first of many islands we visited on the trip. It was a long first
voyage, directly into the wind on a rainy day, so we didn't do much sailing. Once we arrived at
Hatchet Cay, we all took turns jumping off the boat into the warm Belizean waters. There was also an
island nearby with a resort that served fresh Lionfish tacos, as well as some cocktails, which we
enjoyed.

The following day, we headed north, stopping at Lagoon Cay for some kayaking before continuing to
the Pelican Cayes. For dinner, we visited the nearby Hideaway Cay, where afamily of three had
constructed a restaurant and a cabana, despite there being no real land. The dinner was incredibly
satisfying, and we even enjoyed a rum cake baked by the family's daughter.

On the third day of travel, we visited South Water Cay, home to incredible snorkeling near Carrie
Bow. We had first visited Tobacco Cay, but aside from some beautiful colored houses, there was not
much notable. At South Water we also ate on the island, enjoying some unique ginger shrimp and
countless bowls of chicken soup.

At Thatch Cay we discovered a beautiful resort. Here we spent one of my favorite nights, where we
ate dinner with some of the travellers staying in the resort. They were impressed that we were
living on a boat, while we were all slightly jealous that they got to sleep somewhere it wouldn't
rock.

Our last day of travel took us to a small Cay near Placencia. With our flight the next day, we
needed a mooring close to where we would depart. After grabbing a mooring, we met another group
sailing, but they had only just begun their first day. We gave them our spare supplies we didn't use
in return from some rum and friendly conversation.

The next day, we unloaded everything from the boat and prepared for a day of travel home. Though
exhausted and looking forward to my own bed, I felt relaxed from a week out on the open waters.
