---
title: How Nintendo Continues to Innovate in the Gaming Industry
last_modified_at: 2022-07-12T00:10:56
---

Nintendo has proved time and time again that they don't need "next-gen" hardware
to do well in the console market. With almost 20 million Nintendo Switch devices
sold since its release only a year and a half ago, the Switch proves that it can
compete with Xbox and Playstation. But what makes Nintendo impress me is not
just that they can stay competetive in the market, but that they can do it with
an innovative and original console idea. The Switch bridges the gap between
portability and power, allowing users to enjoy Nintendo goodness wherever they
may be.

In the past, Nintendo juggled focusing on their portable platform: the Gameboy,
Gameboy SP, and eventually DS and 3DS lineups, and their console platform: the
NES, Nintendo 64, the Gamecube, and recently the Wii and Wii U. Now that the
Switch has been introduced, the distinction has been drastically reduced. This
enabled developers to build their games for a single console while allowing
users to enjoy the games as they choose: from the comfort of their living room
TV or on the go.

Finally, the focus on a seamless local multiplayer experience is something only
Nintendo seems to be focusing on with many of their new titles. Games like Mario
Kart and Super Smash Bros. are known for being great games to play with friends
in the same room, rather than solely online. What compounds the exerience is the
ability to quickly add new controllers by instantly pairing them to the device.
This makes jumping into a game quick since players don't have to fumble around
with Bluetooth options to pair their device.

Overall, Nintendo and their newest console have demonstrated to me their
resilience in the market and their willingness to innovate and maintain their
philosophy. The Switch is not just focused on beautiful games but quality games
devoted to user enjoyment.
